If you wire an agent to a few MCP servers, tool definitions eat your context window before the user says anything. Each tool is a JSON Schema with a sentence of prose per parameter; ~420 tokens each is normal. Fifty tools is 20k tokens at the front of every request. Prompt caching makes those tokens cheap, but it doesn't make them take up less room.

toolgz compresses that block and translates the model's calls back, so your dispatcher receives the same tool name and arguments it did before:

  const c = compress(myTools)
  const { tools, system } = forAnthropic(c)

  // then, per tool call the model makes:
  const r = c.resolve(name, input)
  if (r.kind === "call") dispatch(r.name, r.args)

I expected this to fail. The aggressive level replaces github_search_issues with "a0" and puts a lookup table in the (cached) system prompt, and my prior was that stripping the semantic name would wreck tool selection. So I built the benchmark to catch that, with deliberately confusable clusters: search_issues vs list_issues, comment vs update, approve vs merge, three products with identically-shaped tools side by side.

It didn't fail. 420 runs across claude-opus-5, gpt-5.6-sol, gemini-3.1-pro-preview and grok-4.5, reasoning enabled on all four at high effort:

- Prompt tokens: -71% to -85% depending on provider
- Tool-definition block: -79% to -88%
- Cost: -7% to -78%
- Latency: faster than uncompressed on all four
- Tasks completed: 60/60, zero hallucinated names, zero malformed arguments

The mechanism seems to be that the model converts a recall problem into a retrieval problem. It doesn't need the name in context; it needs a way to find it, and it will spend a lookup call to do so.

Three things I'd want to know if I were reading this.

1. My first cross-provider run made OpenAI 15% *more* expensive, and fixing that taught me the most. Context fell 69% but the bill went up, because the dispatcher was burning extra turns, and on a reasoning model every turn pays for a fresh round of thinking.

So instead of theorising I made the harness record the calls that were being rejected. Three bugs, all mine: models pass "query" to a parameter named "q" (14 of 18 rejections), they sometimes call the map code as the tool name, and they sometimes pass arguments flat instead of nested. Fixing those took OpenAI from +15% to -7% and drove malformed arguments to zero on all four providers.

Cost still isn't the headline. OpenAI's -7% is the smallest saving because reasoning output dominates its bill, so a smaller prompt moves the total less. The claim is context-window occupancy; cost follows by a variable amount.

2. A bare-name map failed on Grok, deterministically. Not noise: one scenario, 3 of 3 attempts, turns=1, zero tool calls, no error raised. The model read the map and answered without dispatching. Adding the required argument names to each map line fixed it completely, and that is now the default. Bare names remain the only style that has ever failed.

3. Anthropic's own defer_loading tool search completed 6/30 tasks on Haiku 4.5, silently, for the same underlying reason. Deferred loading makes tool discovery optional, and a small model can decline to discover and answer unaided. A dispatcher makes discovery the entry point, which is a structural difference rather than a tuning one. On Opus 5, defer_loading was a clean 20/20, so this only shows up below the frontier tier.

What it costs you: at the aggressive level the model fills a generic argument object, so the provider's constrained sampler no longer enforces your schema. The library validates against your original schema and hands the model a readable error instead, e.g. Missing required parameter "q" - you passed "query" - did you mean "q"? On Haiku 4.5 that path fired on 17 of 30 runs; every one was caught and retried, no task lost, but that is the real edge.

Every per-run record is committed to the repo, so you can recompute any figure rather than trust it. The before/after documentation is generated by executing the library, with a test that fails if the docs drift from the code. TypeScript, zero runtime dependencies, Apache-2.0.

  npm install toolgz

I'd particularly like to be argued with on two things: whether the confusable-tool suite is actually hard enough, and the one result I still can't explain, which is that a map style removing all lookups is fastest and cheapest on three providers and meaningfully worse on xAI.
